I think it's good now, but I don't know exactly.
Just a moment. Because this machine is something
that... well, I don't like machines.
Well, first of all, what's your name? My name is
Rafael San Miguel. And where were you born? In
Guerrero, Tamaulipas. And when did you leave? de
Tamaulipas? 913, 1913. Un momentito.
Y ahora para... Bueno, la historia de su vida. En
las primeras... ¿En qué año nació usted? Nací en
1900.
1900. En enero... And January? January 26. And I
chose the century...
Yes. ...for the end. Don't fight to know how many
years you have, because there you go. It's the same
with the century. Yes. Well, and... My father
was... ...the
superintendent of schools. in the northern
district of Tamaulipas. Yes. Until 1913, when the
revolution ended the schools. Yes. Since then,
we've come to live here in Zapata.
In those days, Zapata was the head of the county.
Zapata was a town inferior to San Ignacio. San
Ignacio, the town that is there, is a few miles
away. Yes. It was a bigger town. It had more trade,
it had more money, it had more population. Yes. But
the head of the county was Zapata, and there was La
Casa de Cortes. The smallest town. It was a little
smaller than... Naturally, Toda esa gente que
vino de Guerrero, muchos nos quedamos en Zapata y
entonces Zapata se fue. Creció la población. La
vida que se llevaba en esos días era una vida
muy quieta, muy tranquila. No había en qué
divertirse ni en qué pasearse.
And in Guerrero, before the revolution, what kind
of life was there? Guerrero? Yes, Guerrero.
Guerrero, his most flourishing period was before
1900.
Guerrero had a population of 10,000 or 12,000
inhabitants. But when I met him, I was already
going to work. What Floreciente Guerrero did was
a project called the Free Zone. The government
allowed to pass to European merchandise or
merchandise from the United States to pass to the
peoples of the border without paying rights. And
then, when they left the people of Guerrero, they
did charge rights. That's why all the peoples of
the border were rich in trade. They had a lot of
trade. At that same time, There was a railway
project. Yes. From Nuevo Laredo to Matamoros.
Yes. And those works came, they came to Guerrero
and they went from Guerrero. They abandoned that
project and then Guerrero started to go down. Then
the revolution hit him the hardest blow of his
life. Porque francamente,
en Guerrero vivían gentes que tenían muchas
propiedades aquí en el condado de Zapata y hasta en
el condado de Webb y en el condado de gentes muy
ricas que tenían grandes ranchos y todo el
producto de esos ranchos iba a dar a Guerrero. Sí.
Ahí vivían sus familias. All the money that was
made in all those ranches here from Hebronville
and all this region and here in part of Laredo, the
owners of those ranches lived in Guerrero. The
product of those ranches was going to Guerrero.
And of course it was one of those very flourishing
times. Then it turns out that the revolution came.
Those rich people who lived in Guerrero came to
live here in the United States. They stayed to live
here. Here they could attend their better ranks
and they didn't come back. And that's where the
decline started faster. Yes. And your father, for
what reason did he
come here? Well, frankly, The only reason was
that... I don't know why we were afraid of the
revolution. Dad wasn't afraid, but... Guerrero
came and we came too. Yes. Is there a lot of danger?
No. No? No. What happened in Guerrero... El 7 de
abril de 1913 entró
una partida revolucionaria a Guerrero en la noche
y tiraron unos cuantos tiros ahí y con eso fue
suficiente para que se viniera todo Guerrero para
acá. Luego nosotros nos venimos como el día 15 de
abril. We were there in Guerrero for a week or a
little more and we came back. Dad's profession,
he couldn't visit schools anymore because there
were no schools anymore. Yes, it's a problem.
Because of the revolution. Yes, because of the
revolution. And we had to make a new branch of life.
A new life. In what way did you become warriors?
What? In what way? On a boat or what? On a boat. On a
boat. There was what you call a ferry boat right in
front of us. And one would pass by and one would go to
the other side. ¿Y tenía su papá tieres aquí en
Texas? Papá no, más bien la familia de mamá. Ah, su
mamá tenía tieres. Su papá tenía ya. Ya, pero antes
de la Revolución no. Sí. ¿Antes? Antes de la
Revolución. ¿Y después de la Revolución? La
familia de mi mamá tenía propiedades aquí y papá
tenía propiedades al otro lado. Yes. What is your
father's name? His name is also Rafael San Miguel.
And his mother? Pilar Cuellar de San Miguel. Pilar
Cuellar. Cuellar. Yes. The family of Cuellar is
very old in this part. And also of San Miguel. It's a
very old family here. The one from Cuellar, yes.
Let me show you the tree I have here. Okay. It's
okay. No, it's okay. A Cuellar captain? From that
family. All that family from Cuellar. I come from
that family. Yes.
Oh, yes. Not long ago. Yes. Well, I know that the
Cuellar family comes from a captain. Yes.
Spanish. Spanish? And your family, what is your
name? My name is Cresencia Ramirez, my father's
name is Ramirez. Ramirez. Ramirez. And is it also
an old family from here? Yes. We also come from
Spain because we come from a Ramirez, José Luis
Ramirez, who was The ones that are not from Spain,
the portions of land they have here. Ah, portions
here in Vialtrán. The family of them, my family
too. My daughter, in one of your books there are
some portraits that Romero Flores gave me when we
were a general for the first time.
Este es el árbol de la familia Cuellar.
El
primer Cuellar que vino aquí a esta región se llamó
Miguel Cuellar. Y la esposa se llamaba Gertrude.
No, perdón. Before Miguel Cuellar came Bartolome
Cuellar, who was the father of Miguel Cuellar.
This Miguel Cuellar was the captain. And from
Captain Cuellar came five children, among them a
Domingo. And from that Domingo came a Fernando.
And from that Fernando Jose Maria came. He was my
grandfather. And from Jose Maria came my mother.
And from here we come. This is the family. There are
many generations. One, two, three, four, five.
And from him, from Domingo. What's your name?
Domingo. And from me, from Mary, from Jesus. Oh,
you? Yes, I am also from Puebla. Oh, you are
cousins. No, no. Distant. Very distant. Very
distant. Yes, very distant. She is my aunt. No, but
I want to tell you that we come from the same place,
but already four or five generations away. Yes,
yes, very far. We came from the same. And for the
Ramírez, they ask me that I am Ramírez. And also, my
great-great-grandfather, who knows what it
would be, he was also one of those who donated the
King of Spain. Yes. The same as them. And Captain
Bartolomé Cuellar was also from Spain. Yes. In
what year were they here? I don't know. Yo entiendo
que el primer cuéllar que vino de España hacia el
Tío was called Ascencio Cuellar. And from
Ascencio Cuellar came a Bartolomé Cuellar, and
from that Bartolomé Cuellar came that Miguel
Cuellar. The generation is over, it's too far.
Yes, it's too far. Maybe 200 or more years. In the
San Miguel family,
There was a Tomas San Miguel who came to Eagle Pass
or to Piedras Negras. Yes, many years ago. I think
he was a soldier of the Spanish Army who came to
Mexico.
And that Tomas San Miguel Pablo San Miguel came.
When was it? Pablo San Miguel, 1701 or something
like that.
And
from Pablo San Miguel came Ruperto San Miguel. He
came from there to Guerrero. He stayed there in
Guerrero. And from there, Ruperto San Miguel came
here. Oh, and then you. Yes. And do you have
children? No. No? No. My sister, we were two, my
sister and I. My sister has a dozen, how many do you
have? Eight. Eight? Eight. Do you have more than
one? No, no, I also have a son, a son, who is 14 years
old. 14. My son is with his father. My husband is now
writing his thesis for the doctorate. And I have a
lot of work and the son is with him to help him. with
me to help him. This is from his father, Rafael San
Miguel, who was the director of schools in
Guerrero. No, in the state. In the state of
Tamaulipas, but he lives in Guerrero. He lived in
Guerrero. Yes. This is a God of ours who was named
Fernando Cuellar, just like this Fernando
Cuellar who is here. Fernando Cuellar. No, this is
another tree. Ah, Cuellar. It's
here. There was this Fernando Cuellar, and then
came this other Fernando Cuellar.
And where did he live? . . . . .
Vivían en Guerrero antes de la Revolución, luego
con la Revolución se unieron. Y no volvió. No
volvió. No volvió. Bueno, si su papá tenía este
trabajo con el Estado, ¿por qué vivía en Guerrero y
no en Ciudad Victoria? Did he live in Mexico? Well,
yes. In Mexico, yes. Who? Your father. He was there
for a long time. No, but that was much later. When my
father was a school inspector in the north
district of Tamaulipas, Tamaulipas was divided
into four school districts. The north, the
center, and two in the south. Ah, I know. And dad
visited the schools in the northern district.
Yes. And it was from here, from Nuevo Larero to
Matamoros, and then over there to San Fernando,
over there, all of that. Yes. And we lived in
Guerrero because that's where our family lived.
Yes. It could have been better for him to have lived
in Matamoros or Novolaredo.
But since he already had his house... Yes, more
family. And after coming here to Texas, to Zapata,
what kind of work did your father have? My father,
apart from being of being a teacher, a titular.
Yes. It was... it was... what you call
surveillance. Yes. And when we came here, dad was
busy measuring land by different... and in that
way, we made a new life. Then... Petroleum
companies started to come to rent land. And my
father started a company that rented land. And
then that company became interested in renting
land in Mexico. And the region of Mexico was better
known by my father. The documentation of Mexico
was better known by my father. And then he went to
live in Mexico. Mexico City. In what year? They
went to Mexico, the city of Mexico. Those lands
were rented here in this region. But then,
in the year 25, came the regulation of the oil law in
Mexico. Yes. in the time of General Calles, who was
the one who regulated the oil law. And all the
companies had the need to have government
concessions to exploit their lands. The lands
that had been contracted before the year 17 had the
right to a very advantageous type of concession.
and those who had been hired between the 17th and
the 25th had the right to another type of
concession. The first one was preferential, the
second one was confirmatory, and the second one
was preferential. The first one was for life, it
was given to the owner of the land. The second one
was given to the company that had the contract for
15 or 20 years. And after 15 or 20 years, the oil went
to the hands of the government. For that reason, my
father had to go and live in Mexico. Five or six
years. He went to Mexico City. And you? No, I stayed
here. He stayed here because he was the one who
managed the bank. He was the one who managed the
bank. The first banker in Zapata. Oh, the first
banker? Yes. Yes? I was the first banker in Zapata,
and I was the one who brought the first drinking
water system to Zapata. The first waterworks.
Also? Yes. And for that... It's over. Yes, the old
Zapata waterworks were from... And then, my
father was in Mexico until the year of 28, for
example. Always the year of 34, right? Yes, that's
right. 34, for example. The year of 34, he was still
in Mexico. Well, where do you receive your
education?
In Guerrero.
In
Guerrero? Sí. Of course, your father was a teacher
and tried to teach me a lot of things, but I never
wanted to learn them. If I had learned half of what
he wanted me to learn... He could have learned it
because he had a teacher at home. Yes, but it's
difficult. And I was preparing to go to Monterrey
to a school. In Monterrey, when the regulations
came out and there was no school anymore, there was
only Venezuela. And it happened to many people the
same way. From there to here, I studied at school in
Zapata, I learned
a little bit of English. Laredo also studied there
for a year. But school, high school, well... It
wasn't possible in those
years. No, not for a long time. Yes. And your mother
was already crying because she was going to
school. Frankly, in those years there were
aspirations for the school. For example,
Guerrero, in a generation before mine, He
produced two or three doctors and an engineer. Two
lawyers.
But then came the revolution and we said that we
couldn't go to school because of the revolution. Y
para esta generación la escuela fue muy difícil.
Fue uno de los males que hizo la revolución. Porque
muchos muchachos que estaban preparados para
irse a Monterrey, a México, a Guadalajara, ya no
pudieron porque el país estaba en guerra. Y la
guerra estaba, pues, 10 años. Sí, 10 años de
guerra. Así es que en 10 años, pues, se pasó todo el
tiempo de estudiar. Sí. Se puso a trabajar. Este es
una... Es el Palacio Municipal de Guerrero, nomás
que no se ve todo. This was the first car I drove. In
Guerrero. No, here in Zapata. Here in Zapata. It
was a man's. Was it yours? No. No? Whose? It was a
man's, Flores, who is here in this portrait. Over
here in the back is the owner of the car. I'm not in
this portrait. And this one here was a
revolutionary general. Ah, on which side?
General Castro. General Castro and, oh, yes,
General Jesús Augustín Castro, who was in charge
of the guerrilla cartel in Ciudad Guerrero,
Tamaulipas. But Castro was general with who? With
Carranza, with... Castro? With who? When that
warrior came, he came with a carranza. With a
carranza. I think this is the... No, this is the...
Oh, they had already taken
it off. This is the one that's back here, but it
doesn't look like it. When the warrior sank, This
is the church. And a boat inside the church. Yes. Is
it possible to see this now? Yes. With boats. And
it's fishing inside the church. La iglesia no se ha
caído, creo. El palacio municipal, el hotel que
estaba ahí, también se cayó. Se alcanza a ver muy
poquito. El hotel aquí se ve un poquito. El hotel,
ahí se hacían fiestas, bailes y todo. Tenía un
salón muy bonito. Y este es después de Presa
Falcón. Ah, sí. Y ahora, pescando en la iglesia...
Ay no, por eso nosotros no hemos vuelto. Yo no, él sí
fue una vez. Es
triste. Sí, es triste. Y se pasa bien también. No se
ve nada. No, todo es agua. El tanque del waterworks
que teníamos, que tenía él allá, estuvo un año
dentro de la casa. Oh, in one onion.
And he never got confused. Yes. But these things
are much later. Yes. Well, when did you get
married? We got married in 1933. 1933. We are going
to get married. Forty years. Forty years. How
beautiful. Right? Yes. And here in Zapata? In
Zapata Viejo. In what? In Zapata Viejo. In Zapata
Viejo. I can't find it. Yes. And you, in these
years, you were, how do you say, banker? El jefe del
banco. No, ya para el 33 ya había dejado yo el banco.
Tú del 19, del 20 al 30 estuvo en el banco. ¿Verdad? O
del 19 al 29. Del 19 al 29. ¿Verdad, la gente? From
1919 to 1920.
More or less 1919. You opened the bank. Is it a
federal bank? No, it was unincorporated. And you
and others? No. El que lo organizó era un abogado de
Laredo. Fue el que vino a organizarlo. Y me dejó a mí
ahí como
cajero. Era todo porque después entró una
muchacha. Sí.
Y después, pues, ¿ahora qué tipo de trabajo haces
después? I don't have any. A little bit of a ranch
and a little bit of... You're retired. I'm
retired, yes. It's good. But you also have... You
run the estate of that uncle. Estate. Estate. Yes.
I'm the administrator of the estate of that
gentleman and also of his wife. .
Negotiations
with land. .
Rentals. Rentals and plants. Petroleum.
Petroleum too. Did you have land too? Something.
Something? Something there that belonged to my
mother. Half of what belonged to my mother. And
your land isn't under the dam, is it? No. It's very
far. Hebron? Do you know where Hebron is? A little
further? Hebronville. More here. More here, more
inside, near San Antonio? No, no, no. No, there's a
school. From Hebron? Is this Hebron? Yes. Ah, yes.
Near Hebron. Perfect.
Well, maybe... Oh, why did you never go to Mexico?
The bank or something else?
Well, no. You get used to living here. Well, he used
to go before because he had his father's land. But
then he sold it to one of their families. So now,
since he sold it, he no longer has a business there.
He only has family to visit. But the land was
finally sold to him. It's all here in the United
States. Tell him why. Well, there was the danger of
the agrarians and all that. Well, I couldn't live
there in the field, right? The agrarian law in
Mexico is very hard. Yes. And they realize that
there is a field that the owner doesn't... And I
told him,
The agrarian law is passed on to you. And he sold it
to some cousins. Well, frankly, I didn't want to
sell it, but the lady... Oh, yes, because here very
close... Is there a gymnasium? Yes. A little
closer to the gymnasium, with about six or eight
people. On the other side. Yes. All the land is
gone. All the owners had to leave because the
agrarian law came and took it away. Todos. Una
parte muy grande. Se salieron ranchos, varios
ranchitos y todo, que tenían sus terrenos. Y
entonces ellos tuvieron que irse a Guerrero,
porque la ley agraria llegó ahí y se los quitó, los
terrenos, y se los dio a otras personas. Y entonces
yo le dije, yo no quisiera que tu terreno le
sucediera eso, mandarle que lo venga. Sí. Y él le
gusta conservar las cosas, batalló. Le hacía...
It's sad to leave those who were for their father.
But from there I said to him, and if the agrarians
come and take him, it's sadder. And he sold him to
some cousins who live there. Some cousins
who live in Nuevo Lago. Because I was afraid that
the agrarians would leave. And did the cousins
have problems with the agrarians? No, I don't
think so. As they live there. Those who live in
their ranches,
they don't have the agrarian law there. But the
lands that are a little uninhabited, that the
owner doesn't give them a lot of heat to sustain
them well, like a very big ranch, they have the
agrarian law. Ah, sí, yo entiendo. La ley es para
dueños que no viven en tierra. Eso, exactamente. Y
los primos, ¿sí viven allá? Los primos viven y son
rancheros. Sí, allí están siempre y trabajan, y
tienen trabajadores que les ayudan y todo eso. Y
casas en su tierra y todo. Sí. Pero no fue posible
para usted tener casa allá en México y otro aquí.
Irnos a vivir allá, pues no podía. Sí. I don't
understand. He understood me. What is this? A
cart. What is a cart? A cart. It's very fast. Yes, it
goes very fast. Well, during the days of the Falcon
Dam, what happened here? Oh, a lot happened. A lot
happened? Let's see what the gentleman has to say.
Well, the expropriations of the Falcón
prison forced us to leave at the end of 1953. That's
when Zapata moved to this place. The Commission of
Limits, which is international, there is a
commission in Mexico, there is a commission here.
The commission on this side did not intend to
change Zapata. But in the end, someone forced them
and the only thing they did was to clean the land and
scratch the sunsets, mark the sunsets on the
streets. And then each one of them built their
house as best they could and they paid us for the
houses we had there. And then, frankly, the people
of Zapata have come to do it for their own effort.
It's growing a lot. They were lucky to have a
tourist attraction, I don't know why. It has very
good hotels, it has very good restaurants. And one
thing attracts another. There is already a very
large Sajona population here. We are already more
or less the 50 or 60% of Mexicans and the 40 or 50%
Sajones. In general, they are old people who are
already retired. El condado de Zapata ha sido un
condado de gentes muy buenas. Nosotros decimos
que la gente buena del condado de Zapata vino de
Guerrero. La verdad de las cosas es que el condado
de Zapata es un pueblo, es un condado de gentes
pacíficas, gentes muy buenas. Yes. And
everything that is coming right now are equally
very good people. There are no discriminatory
problems of any species.
Yes. I was lucky to have a very good population and
the new population that came was also very good.
And you live here in Zapata very... There is a
certain comfort, a certain security. There is
much less crime than in other parts. Especially
juvenile crime. It seems that here in Zapata there
is none. And in other cities there is a lot of
that. But this thing of good people is the same with
new shoes and old shoes. Are they the same? Thank
you. He doesn't
because he's going to talk. He's going to cough.
Well, and Guerrero Nuevo, is it like Zapata or
different?
Well, on the Mexican side, the Mexican Commission
worked on a different problem. The problem of
what? The Mexican Commission did build a town.
Yes. And all those who lived in Guerrero Viejo se lo
llevó y fue y les entregó las casas ya hechas.
Nosotros teníamos casa en Guerrero, pero no me la
pudieron dar porque no vivía yo en ella. Alguna vez
me dijo a mí un ingeniero que sí me la daba como
quisiera, pero pues no, yo mejor decidimos
venderla, me la pagaron. Él me dijo, si quiere casa
en Guerrero Nuevo, se la damos. We put it there that
they lived in Guerrero too. Because their
commitment was to make houses for those who lived
in Guerrero.
Yes. And on that side, in that respect, the Mexican
Commission worked better, because they gave them
the house made. New. New, with electric lights,
But when we came here, there was still no water? No,
no water. There was the plant, but it
wasn't good to drink. It's on this
side. We couldn't drink it. We had to drink water
from the plant, from Zapata 10. We had to drink it
from Zapata 10. We had to drink it from Zapata 10. We
had to drink it from Zapata 10. We had to drink it
had to drink it from ¿Es mejor o estaba mejor,
piensa usted, el plan de Guerrero Nuevo o plan de
Zapata Nuevo? Bueno, yo diría que al principio fue
mejor el plan de Guerrero, el plan de aquí porque
They brought them to a new town, already built,
with paved streets, with drainage, with
everything, right? They gave them their houses
ready. But now, later... I
consider that it went even better than Guerrero.
Why? because of the effort of their people. The
commission didn't do anything. They paid for the
houses, but when we came, we ran out of money to
build houses. We brought the houses, but they
didn't come in good quality. Yes, because of the
movement. Does the government pay for this
movement? Yes, the government paid for the house
and then sold it to me for something else, so I could
take it out. But they didn't pay for you to take it
out. No. Well, if I understand correctly, the
Mexican government does a lot more help in
Guerrero. At first, yes. At first, with water and
houses and everything. Here in Zapata, the
government doesn't do much. Well, I didn't want to
do much, but I went to
El Paso,
In a commission we went from Zapata to talk to the
Commissioner of Limits. Yes. With Mr. Loza. We
went to talk to him to see what he could offer. Here
in Zapata there was a lot of talk and a lot of
politics in those days. Yes. While a group of
people They said it was going to be a modern town
with all kinds of facilities and this and that. The
other group said they were not going to do
anything. No, the opinions were divided. I went
with a commission to El Paso and the American
commissioner told us...